CEGE0024



Structures and Materials:
Plastic Analysis and Finite Element Modelling



Dr. Leo de Waal
l.waal@ucl.ac.uk
Eighth session objectives

• Modelling with 1D elements

• Sub-modelling boundary conditions




                                      2
Select all correct statements. Under which conditions is it appropriate to
model a structural member using 1D beam or truss elements?


a) One dimension of the structure is much larger than the others (slender
   geometry)
b) The cross-sectional behaviour can be represented using section
   properties (A, I, J)
c) The primary interest is global stiffness, deflection, or internal force
d)    Local 3D stress concentrations (e.g. near holes or contacts) are
     critical
e) The member carries only axial force
f)   The exact through-thickness stress distribution is required




                                  CEGE0024                                   3
Connections
Pin connections: Transfers axial but no moment




.



                                                                             4
                                                 [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections

Moment connection
• Full continuity between members
• The connection is able to transfer moments




                                                                           5
                                               [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections

What type of connection is this?




                                                               6
                                   [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections

Semi-rigid connection
• In reality, connections usually fall somewhere between pinned and completed
  moment transfer.




                                                                                               7
                                                                   [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connection
Treatment of finite depth of beams
• Sometimes it is necessary to take account of the finite depth of the beam to model
  more accurately the effect of the connection or a support.




                                                                                                 8
                                                                     [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections



• Neglecting the effect of the finite sizes of the members will tend to underestimate the
  stiffness of the connection.
• It would be conservative to take the design support moment for the beam at the
  intersection point, but it is normal to take it at the face of the column




                                                                                                9
                                                                    [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections




• Finite width of the column can be modelled using a rigid link
• The inclusion of the rigid links will increase the effective stiffness of the beam.




                                                                                                   10
                                                                       [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
 Connections



• Finite width of the column can be modelled using a rigid link – increases stiffness
• A rotational spring between the end of the stub and the beam to take account of the rotational
  stiffness of the connection - it reduces the stiffness
• The conventional model may therefore give reasonable predictions of stiffness due to
  compensating assumptions.
• Whether or not the rigid links and the rotational springs are important can be assessed using
  a sensitivity analysis.
• Appendix J of Eurocode 3 (CEN 2004b) gives rules for estimating values of the rotational
  stiffness of steelwork connections.                                [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
                                                                                                 11
Connections

• Modelling of pinned connections




                                                                12
                                    [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections

• At a joint, if m members meet at a joint, only m-1 members should be released.
  The single unreleased member end provides a rotational stiffness, but since there
  is no other element with bending stiffness to connect to it, the joint behaves as a
  pin.




                                                                                            13
                                                                [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Connections

Eccentricities:
• Ideally deign without them but
  sometimes it is not possible, in this
  case you should consider them.




                                                                      14
                                          [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Modelling varying thickness




                                                          15
                              [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Questions related to the assignment
Part 2:
6. Boundary Conditions for more detailed analysis (1 x A4 page maximum)
Assuming the rafter splice connection between the tusk rafter and arch rafter is a candidate for
more detailed analysis, provide:
• A clear sketch showing the boundary conditions you would apply to a local FE model of this
  connection
• A description of the forces and/or displacements that would be imposed
You are not required to build the detailed FE model. The focus is on appropriate boundary condition
definition.




                                                                                                      16
Recap L6: Modelling principles   [3] Duffour, P (2026)




                                                    17
Recap L7: Mesh refinement

St-Venant principle: The detailed stress distribution near where a load is applied only
matters locally. Far away, only the resultant force matter.

• Local stresses: highly dependent on how a load or constraint is applied
• Resultant stresses: govern global response (deformation, stresses)




                                                                                    18
Recap L7: Mesh refinement
St-Venant’s principle: The detailed stress distribution near where a load is applied
only matters locally. Far away, only the resultant force matter.
                                              “The St-Venant principle has the following
                                              consequences.

                                              • The effect of local stresses tends to
                                                become negligible at distances twice the
                                                length over which the stress
                                                concentration acts.

                                              • When calculating resultant stresses, the
                                                force actions can be replaced by static
                                                equivalents. This is not so for local
                                                stresses” [1]
                                                                                             19
                                                                 [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
How should you apply boundary
conditions?
At the interface between global and local models you have two broad ways to “connect”
them:

(1) Enforce compatibility (match displacements)
You prescribe the boundary motion (translations/rotations) on the sub-model boundary so it
deforms like the global structure at that location. This tends to work well because:
• the global model is usually good at predicting global deformations
• St-Venant’s principle: away from the detailed joint, the solution is governed mainly by the
  overall deformation state, not exact traction distribution



                                                                                                20
How should you apply boundary
conditions?
At the interface between global and local models you have two broad ways to “connect”
them:

(2) Enforce equilibrium (apply forces/tractions)
You apply the section forces/moments from the beam model to the sub-model boundary. This is
riskier because:
• the local stiffness of the sub-model is different (shells, bolt rows, plates, contact, etc.). Small
  changes in stiffness/details can cause big changes in reaction forces and their distribution
• the true traction distribution across the cut is not known from a 1D beam model



                                                                                                   21
Questions related to the assignment
Part 2:
6. Boundary Conditions for more detailed analysis (1 x A4 page maximum)
Assuming the rafter splice connection between the tusk rafter and arch rafter is a candidate for
more detailed analysis, provide:
• A clear sketch showing the boundary conditions you would apply to a local FE model of this
  connection
• A description of the forces and/or displacements that would be imposed
You are not required to build the detailed FE model. The focus is on appropriate boundary condition
definition.




                                                                                                      22
Questions related to the
assignment




                                                        23
                           [4] Supplementary material
Questions related to the assignment
• Part 1:
Design requirement: You are required to design the beam such that the
solution is economical and practical to construct.




                                                                        24
 Recap L3 - Multiple spans
 • Continuous beams are analysed in a similar way.            Number of hinges required for collapse:
                                                                          𝐷 =4−2=2
                                                                    ∴ 𝑛 = 𝐷 + 1 = 3 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠




       Possible collapse mechanisms:

       ➢Complete collapse: 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠 = 𝑛

       ➢Partial collapse: 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠 < 𝑛

       ➢Over-Complete collapse: 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠 > 𝑛

[2] Williams and Todd, 2020                                                                             25
References
[1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005). Modern structural analysis : modelling process and guidance / Iain A. MacLeod. Thomas Telford

[2] Williams, M., and J. D. Todd. Structures: Theory and Analysis. Macmillan Education UK, 2000.

[3] Duffour, P. Personal communications – CEGE0009 lecture slides, (2026).




                                           CEGE0024                                                                        26
