CEGE0024



Structures and Materials:
Plastic Analysis and Finite Element Modelling



Dr. Leo de Waal
l.waal@ucl.ac.uk
Seventh session objectives

• Understand and be able to apply a mesh sensitivity analysis

• Understand basic checks you may complete to verify your model

• Be aware of different material models that are available




                                                                  2
Recap: Sixth session objectives

Brief introduction to FE modelling and understand the effect of the following
fundamental aspects for applying an FE model:

• Discretisation
• Shape functions
• Element types




                                                                                3
Recap from last week                          • Choice of shape function (element order)

                                                             𝑢(𝑥)
                                                  𝑟𝑖                         𝑟𝑗



                                                            Linear


                  • Element type                              𝑢(𝑥)
                  • Level of discretisation
                                                   𝑟𝑖           𝑟𝑘            𝑟𝑗


  𝑟1         𝑟2             𝑟3
                                                           Quadratic

       (1)         (2)
                                                                                           4
Recap from last week             𝑢(𝑥)
                           𝑟1           𝑟2




                                𝑢(𝑥)
 Modeling choices:
 Element type              𝑟1     𝑟2    𝑟3
 Level of discretization
 Shape function




                                𝑢(𝑥)
                           𝑟1      𝑟3   𝑟2
Recap from last week
                                                                                Constitutive equation
                                                                                             𝑑
                                                                                𝜎 = 𝐸𝜀 = 𝐸     𝑢(𝑥)
                                                                                            𝑑𝑥


 Modeling choices:                                                           • External equilibrium
 Element type
 Level of discretization                                                     • Internal equilibrium
 Shape function                                                                      *It is approximate!




                   *In this example the exact displacement field is a cubic function, so to recover the exact
                   solution we would need to assume a cubic shape function for the element. In this case
                   internal equilibrium would be met.
  Recap from last week: Element types
  types

                              Reducing the
                              dimension of the
                              problem through
                              assumptions



                                Use the lowest-dimensional
                                element that still captures
                                the physics you need!


[5] Sharma, K. (2019).                                        8
 General points on discretisation
                         Coarse mesh                          Fine mesh




                                                                              How do we
                                                                              select an
                                                                              appropriate
                                                                              mesh density?


                 • A finer mesh density → generally increases accuracy
                 • Computationally → costs more
                 • Higher order shape functions → require less discretisation, and generally have
                   less numerical issues
[6] Duffour, P (2026).                                                                          12
Mesh refinement
Discretisation error arises after the conceptual model is defined, when the structure is
divided into finite elements.
This error comes from two main sources:


1. Element behaviour error - caused by the assumptions used to describe how each
   element deforms (the shape functions). Using higher-order shape functions generally
   gives a more accurate representation of the behaviour within each element.


2. Mesh density error - caused by how fine or coarse the mesh is. Increasing the number of
   elements (refining the mesh) usually improves accuracy and causes the solution to
   approach the exact solution of the conceptual model.


Finite element analysis gives an approximation, not the exact solution. Mesh refinement is
how we check whether that approximation is acceptable.                [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
                                                                                                  13
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?

• If the results have convergence towards the exact solutions.


             What results?                                 What if we do not know the
                                                           exact solution?




                                                                                  14
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?




                                                                                       15
                                                           [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?




                                                                                       16
                                                           [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?




                                                                                       17
                                                           [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?




                                                                                       18
                                                           [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?




          We have a stress singularity here!
                                                                                       19
                                                           [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement
Singularities arise from idealised geometry and the
material model. They are not a numerical artifact.

Types of singularities:

1. Re-entrant corners
Analytical (exact) solutions for linear elastic stress
around a corner with radius r:
                      𝜎 ∝ 𝑟 𝜆−1
Where: 𝜆 depend on the geometry of the corner
and is within the bounds 0 < 𝜆 < 1
A sharp internal corner creates infinite stress!         [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
                                                                                     20
Mesh refinement
Singularities arise from idealised geometry and the
material model. They are not a numerical artifact.

Types of singularities:

2. Point loads
Area of contact 𝐴 = 0.

                     𝑃 𝑃
                   𝜎= = =∞
                     𝐴 0

                                                                                  21
                                                      [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement

• Can you have a singularity in 1D elements?
                                       P




                                               22
Mesh refinement
Should you apply modelling techniques to avoid singularities?
…..it depends what physics is important.

St-Venant principle: The detailed stress distribution near where a load is applied only
matters locally. Far away, only the resultant force matter.

• Local stresses: highly dependent on how a load or constraint is applied
• Resultant stresses: govern global response (deformation, stresses)




                                                                                    23
Mesh refinement
St-Venant’s principle: The detailed stress distribution near where a load is applied
only matters locally. Far away, only the resultant force matter.
                                              “The St-Venant principle has the following
                                              consequences.

                                              • The effect of local stresses tends to
                                                become negligible at distances twice the
                                                length over which the stress
                                                concentration acts.

                                              • When calculating resultant stresses, the
                                                force actions can be replaced by static
                                                equivalents. This is not so for local
                                                stresses” [1]
                                                                                             24
                                                                 [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Mesh refinement
• Are the local stresses important for modelling the failure of this concrete beam?




                                                                                      25
 Singularity vs stress concentration
                         Coarse mesh                  Fine mesh




                                                                  Do we need a fine mesh
                                                                  everywhere?

                                                                  • Mesh should be finer
                                                                    in areas where there
                                                                    are large gradients in
                                                                    the field variable.
                 • Singularity 𝜎 → ∞
                 • Stress concentrations are finite


[6] Duffour, P (2026).                                                                       26
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?

• Convergence implies that as the mesh density is increased the results will converge
  towards the exact solution. The rate of convergence depends on the type of
  element and the number of elements in the mesh.

• A solution is converged when further refinement causes negligible change in the
  quantity of interest.




                                                                                    27
Mesh refinement
How do we determine whether that approximation is acceptable?

• You must decide what quantities you check for convergence!
    ➢Quantities of interest that should converge: Global displacements, reactions
     forces, internal stress (away from boundaries)
    ➢ Quantities of interest that do not converge: peak stress at corners or loading
     points (singularities)




                                                                                       28
Mesh refinement
How to perform a basic mesh convergence study:

1. Choose a quantity of interest: i.e. 𝛿

2. Create a refinement sequence: rule of thumb is to half the element size each
   iteration.

3. Plot or tabulate the result                               Remember, a converged
                                                             answer to an incorrect
                                           𝛿𝑛 −𝛿𝑛−1          model is still wrong!
4. Apply a convergence criterion: i.e.                < 2%
                                              𝛿𝑛

                                                                                      29
Model verification
“Do the results correspond to what is expected from the model? or have any errors
been made in implementing the solution process?” [1]

Checklist:
• Error warnings in FE program outputs

• Overall equilibrium check
                                    ෍𝐹 = 𝑅 ≈ 0

Where 𝑅 are the residuals.

                                                                                          30
                                                              [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
Model verification
“Do the results correspond to what is expected from the model? or have any errors
been made in implementing the solution process?” [1]

Checklist:
• Confirm restraints are correctly applied by inspecting the deformations here

• If the structure and loading is symmetric, check that the solution is also symmetric.

• Qualitative check: check the deflected shape, forces/stresses follow your expectation

• Quantitative check: simplified model/hand calculations to predict deformation or
  forces                                                        [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
                                                                                            31
Material model
          Liner elastic                                    Plastic




• Many other material models are available that may be required when trying to
  capture the correct physics of the problem.
                                                                                                 32
                                                                     [1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005)
References
[1] MacLeod, I. A. (2005). Modern structural analysis : modelling process and guidance / Iain A. MacLeod. Thomas Telford

[2] Debney, P., & Institution of Structural Engineers. (2020). Computational engineering / Peter Debney. Institution of
Structural Engineers.

[3] Khennane, A. (2013). Introduction to finite element analysis using MATLAB and Abaqus / Amar Khennane. Taylor &
Francis.

[4] Newman, G. M., J. T. Robinson, and C. G. Bailey. (2000). Fire Safe Design: A New Approach to Multi-Storey Steel-
Framed Buildings. SCI Publication Fire and Steel Construction 288. Steel Construction Institute.

[5] Sharma, K. (2019). Introduction to FEA [SlideShare slides]. SlideShare.
https://www.slideshare.net/KishanSharma26/introduction-to-fea-77358694

[6] Duffour, P. Personal communications – CEGE0009 lecture slides, (2026).

[7] Mandal, N. K., & Lees, M. (2016). An investigation into monitoring rail stress in continuously welded rails through stress-
free temperature [Conference paper]. Conference on Railway Engineering, Melbourne, Australia.

                                             CEGE0024                                                                             33
